Describe `context` field and separate out common operations. (#54)
single-cell-data/SOMA: abstract_specification.md

## Platform-Specific Configuration

SOMA includes provisions for two separate ways to provide platform-specific configuration data to objects and operations.

> For configuration settings that affect a single operation, SOMA functions include a `platform_config` parameter, which can be used on a call-by-call basis to specify short-term behavior.

Reviewer: I find the `short-term behavior` phrase confusing, as some of the `platform_config` parameters modify schema, which has long-term effects.

Suggest using `... to specify per-operation behavior`, or even more explicitly, `... to specify behavior of a single operation call.`

Author: I've tried to rephrase this.

> For long-lived configuration settings, SOMA objects expose a `context` field that contains implementation-defined data that can be shared over an entire analysis session.

Reviewer: Perhaps: "For multi-operational configuration settings, ..."?

Author: Reworked this along with the below.

Reviewer: It still begs the question of what an "analysis session" is, and how it relates to the lifespan of the object.  Can this be tightened to something like "... shared over the life of the object?"

Author: It can last beyond the lifecycle of any single object (cf. the manual-context-passing part of the example), so I'm not sure "the life of the object" quite captures it; I'll give this a little time to stew.

## Platform-Specific Configuration

SOMA includes provisions for two separate ways to provide platform-specific configuration data to objects and operations.

> For configuration settings that affect a single operation, SOMA functions include a `platform_config` parameter, which can be used on a call-by-call basis to change implementation-specific behavior for that call.
> For configuration settings whose scope affects many operations, SOMA objects expose a `context` field that contains implementation-defined data that can be shared over an entire analysis session.

Reviewer 2: We might want to also mention the parent/child inheritance of the context here, to introduce the idea before it is detailed below. Something like the below. I ended up editing both lines (platform_config and context), for consistency.

```suggestion
All SOMA operations include a `platform_config` parameter that allow a caller to provide implementation-specific configuration settings that affect the behavior of an operation on per-call basis.
All SOMA objects expose a `context` field that contain implementation-specific configuration settings that affect all operations called on a SOMA object and any of its children, and that are scoped to the life of these objects.
```

Author: This is a good idea. It should also become clearer when we specify the object lifecycle methods in a soon-to-come change.

Author: I also added some language here to note that context can be shared across more than just a single parent/child set.

#### Implementation and usage guidelines

The configuration passed in the `platform_config` object is intended for operation-specific tuning (though it may make sense for user code to use the same `platform_config` across multiple operations). A `platform_config` should only be used for the operation it was provided to (and to directly dependent operations); it should not be stored for later calls. Environmental configuration (like login credentials or backend storage region) should be provided via the (to-be-defined) Context object.

Operations should not *require* a `platform_config` entry to complete; the platform should use a sensible default if a given configuration value is not provided. Required environmental data generally belongs in the Context object.

A platform should only ever examine its own entry in the `platform_config` mapping. Since the structure and contents of each entry is wholly implementation-defined, one platform cannot make any assumptions at all about another’s configuration, and for predictability should avoid even trying to extract any information from any other configuration entries.

> ### Long-lived context data

Reviewer: A point of confusion:   as I read this, the `context` field is read-only, has no user-accessible operations, and is implementation specific.  So why specify it - why not treat it as hidden state?  How does the user "set" the context?

I think the confusion is that the user _can_ specify a context in some operations (eg, `open`).  So perhaps change the first sentence to:  "... described above, the user can specify a `context` value in certain operations.  The context value is an implementation-dependent, multi-operation configuration object, which will provide session-like state."

Do we also need to specify how it is inherited/passed, and the lifespan?  The text says "global state", which seems to imply I can only have one context?  But I suspect that there are operations where I can "set" the context, and others that will inherit it.

Lastly: do we need the concept of a default context?  I don't think we do, but it might simplify the description of how the context propagates.

Reviewer: Are these changes universal, to all implementations?  Or are they Python ABI specific?   If only the latter (which seems quite possible), then they probably don't belong in this spec.

Reviewer: with the example, I think this is sufficiently clear (for now).

In addition to the `platform_config` parameters described above, implementations can also store a value on the `context` field of a SOMA object.
This read-only field should be used to store long-lived implementation-specific data that is used to access SOMA datasets.
Examples of data that might belong in a context includes:

- Storage credentials or API keys
- Endpoint URLs
- Database connections

In other words, the `context` contains what is effectively the global state for a SOMA analysis session.

The format and contents of a `context` object is completely implementation-defined.

> An implentation may provide a way to construct its specific context type, which can be used by user setup code to connect to the SOMA data store.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An implementation may provide a way to construct its specific context type, which can be used by user setup code to connect to the SOMA data store.
```

Operations should not *require* a `platform_config` entry to complete; the platform should use a sensible default if a given configuration value is not provided. Required environmental data generally belongs in the Context object.

A platform should only ever examine its own entry in the `platform_config` mapping. Since the structure and contents of each entry is wholly implementation-defined, one platform cannot make any assumptions at all about another’s configuration, and for predictability should avoid even trying to extract any information from any other configuration entries.

### Long-lived context data

In addition to the `platform_config` parameters described above, implementations can also store a value on the `context` field of a SOMA object.

> This read-only field should be used to store long-lived implementation-specific data that is used to access SOMA datasets.

Author: Extremely good idea.
